Tutorial for the Optical Tactile Plugin (#250)
ignitionrobotics/ign-gazebo: tutorials/optical_tactile_plugin.md

\page opticaltactileplugin Optical Tactile Plugin

This plugin implements a tactile sensor from a depth camera and a contact sensor. 
Given the increasing number of this kind of sensors and their use cases, this 
plugin is the first step towards precisely evaluating this technology and its 
possible applications before being deployed in the real world.

Currently, the plugin is required to work within models that have one link, one
contact sensor and one depth camera. In order to simulate the behaviour of a
deformable membrane that returns the contact forces of the object being touched, 
we merge the information coming from this two different sensors. Vectors normal to 
the surfaces being touched are computed from the values coming from the depth camera.
Next, this values are merged with the information returned by the contact sensor, i.e.
force magnitudes, penetration and depth.

Functionality can be added on top of the information returned by this sensor,

> like object recognition, tactile imaging, precise manipulation or human-robot

Author: > "noise, drift, hysteresis, and higher level physical properties extracted by image processing."

Should I mark this one as TODO?

user get a better understanding of the different components of the plugin:

```
                               ___
                             /|   |
                            / |   |
                           /  |   |
                        _ /   |   |
 Depth camera ---------|_|    | ·-|----- Model's origin
 placed behind the        \   |   |
 'membrane' (see the next  \  |   |
 section)                   \ |   |
                             \|___|--- 'Tactile membrane': This is the collision
                                        geometry of the contact sensor. Forces
                                        returned by the sensor are inside this
                                        volume (check the <extended_sensing>
                                        parameter)
```

## Assumptions

The following assumptions have been made when working on this plugin:

- Currently, the plugin's model should be made up of one link, one contact
sensor and one depth camera.
- The geometry of the sensor must be a box. Ideally, the size should be around
20x20x5 mm, but this can be changed.
- The depth camera should be displaced from the model's origin in the negative

> direction of the X axis, so it's not placed inside the membrane. This can be done

Reviewer: A brief explanation for why it has to be behind would also help.

setting the depth camera's `<pose>` accordingly. Check out the [example below](#try-it-out).
- There should not be a `<visual>` element inside the link, so the depth camera
isn't facing the link and can return coherent values. The 'membrane' can still

> be visualized setting the `<visualize_sensor>` parameter to true. For more information

Reviewer: I think this is more clear: "so the depth camera... values" -> "so that the link of the sensor does not block the depth camera's view"

Word missing: visualized `by` setting

\page opticaltactileplugin Optical Tactile Plugin

This plugin simulates an optical tactile sensor from a depth camera and a contact sensor. 
Given the increasing number of this kind of sensors and their use cases, this 
plugin is the first step towards data collection and sanity check of algorithms
involving this type of sensors.

Currently, the plugin is required to work within models that have one link, one
contact sensor and one depth camera. In order to simulate the behaviour of the
contact surface, which returns the contact forces of the object being touched,
we merge the information coming from these two different sensors. Contact normals to 

> the surfaces being touched are computed from the depth image. (TODO) Next, these

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the surfaces being touched are computed from the depth image. (TODO pending ExtraContactData fields from https://github.com/ignitionrobotics/ign-physics/pull/40 are exposed in ign-gazebo) Next, these
```

Author: 457691b

values are merged with the information returned by the contact sensor, i.e. force 
magnitudes, penetration and depth.

The plugin allows the user to visualize the contact normals of the objects in 

> the proximity of being touched. In the next image, we can see these normals 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the proximity of contact. In the next image, we can see these normals 
```

Author: 457691b

when we touch the ring and the top surface of a can of coke:

> <img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/ignitionrobotics/ign-gazebo/master/tutorials/files/optical_tactile_plugin/coke_can.png"/>

Reviewer: Is it possible to show the curved side of the can with normals in several directions? The interesting part of the can is really the curved surface and not the flat top and bottom.

Author: 1dec57f

Currently, the plugin is required to work within models that have one link, one

> contact sensor and one depth camera. In order to simulate the behaviour of the

Reviewer: Sorry I didn't catch this grammar earlier.
```suggestion
Currently, the plugin must be in a model that has exactly one link, one
contact sensor, and one depth camera. In order to simulate the behaviour of the
```

contact surface, which returns the contact forces of the object being touched,
we use the information coming from these two different sensors. Contact normals to 
the surfaces being touched are computed from the depth image. In order to visually
check that the plugin is working correctly, both contacts and normal forces can be visualized.

> As a [future work](#future-work), information from the contact sensor, i.e. force magnitudes,
> penetration and depth (TODO pending ExtraContactData fields from 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As [future work](#future-work), information from the contact sensor, i.e. force normals,
magnitudes, and penetration depth (TODO pending ExtraContactData fields from 
```

- Currently, the plugin's model should be made up of one link, one contact
sensor and one depth camera.
- The geometry of the sensor must be a box, because the interpolation of the 
contacts returned assumes 4 points of input. The visualization of contacts 
and the `<extended_sensing>` parameter currently make this assumption as well.

> Ideally, the size should be around 20x20x5 mm, but this can be changed. That is
> the approximate size of a real tactile sensor. A bigger one will also work,

Reviewer: Contact sensors really vary too much to have one consensus approximate size.
```suggestion
Ideally, the size should be around 20x20x5 mm, but this can be changed. A bigger one will also work,
```

Author: 457691b

as long as the contact surface fits inside the camera's FOV.
- The depth camera should be displaced from the model's origin in the negative

> direction of the X axis, so it's not placed inside the contact surface. This can

Reviewer: It's not clear what frame "X axis" is referring to here. It would be clearer to say what entity this is with respect to, or what surface it is orthogonal to, etc., rather than using the variable.

Author: 457691b 
I think now should be clear and it should be enough with the explanation and the `Components layout` and `Try it out` sections.

be done by setting the depth camera's `<pose>` accordingly. Check out the [example below](#try-it-out).
If the camera was placed in the middle of the contact surface, objects could go

> past the camera and information would be missing. 

Reviewer: This sentence isn't clear what it's trying to say, to someone who didn't implement the plugin. Places that can be made clearer include, "in the middle" on the surface, or in the middle below the surface and inside the geometry? "Go past" in which direction - from in front of the camera to behind it, or the other way around, and when does that happen - when the sensor approaches the object?

Author: 457691b

start and doesn't need to be enabled. This element is optional, and the default
value is true.

- `<contacts_resolution>`: Distance in mm to interpolate the contacts
returned by the contact sensor. The plugin interpolates these contacts given that the

> number of contacts returned by the physics engine doesn't allow a high resolution

Author: 7b40828

  `/<namespace>/normal_forces` : Topic where a message is published each
  time the normal forces are computed.

## Performance
In order to give an idea about the resources consumed by the plugin, we carried 
out some simple experiments by setting the parameters to specific values.
To run the experiments, we've used a Xiaomi Mi Air 13.3 with an Intel Core
i5-8250U quad-core 1.6GHz.

The main parameter that can affect the computational cost of running
the plugin is the visualization resolution. The following parameters 
have been tested for a sensor with a size of 20x20x5 mm:

- `<visualization_resolution>`: A value of 20 allows us to see a sufficient
number of forces and check what the sensor is looking at. However, if we
set the value to less than 5, performance may decrease.

> | `<visualization_resolution>`  | No. of forces computed (not the same as visualized) | Worst RTF (%) |

Reviewer: Hmm for the sake of clarity and nicer presentation, I would just put an asterisk in the table, e.g. `No. of forces computed*`, and then a footnote below the table explaining it, e.g. `* blah`.

Isn't the RTF in a pretty small range? What was the range you saw? If it only differs on the scale of 0.01, then just eliminate `Worst`. Right now it sounds like you ran it 10 times and took the worst.

> | `<visualization_resolution>`  | No. of forces computed (not the same as visualized) | Worst RTF (%) |

Author: In all of the cases, I saw that RTF was around 0.9 and then dropped to those worst values for <1s and then went back to 0.9 or so.

> | `<visualization_resolution>`  | No. of forces computed (not the same as visualized) | Worst RTF (%) |

Reviewer: In that case, having that explanation for what that column means would be helpful.
Essentially, below the table, there should be explanations for both columns of numbers. That is typical for number reporting to add the English explanation for the table entries so that things are clear.

- `<clip>`: These values should be set in a way that the contact surface stays
in between its far and near values. Otherwise, nothing will be visualized.

## Topics & services
In order to access the data computed by the plugin and control it during
simulation, the following topics and services have been advertised:

  `/<namespace>/enable` : Service used to enable and disable the plugin. If disabled,
  the plugin won't publish messages in the `/normal_forces` nor the `/contacts` topics.

  `/<namespace>/normal_forces` : Topic where a message is published each
  time the normal forces are computed.

  `/<namespace>/contacts` : Topic where a message is published each time the contacts
  are computed.

## Performance

> In order to get an idea about the resources consumed by the plugin, some
> experiments have been made by setting the parameters to specific values.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to give an idea about the resources consumed by the plugin, we carried 
out some simple experiments by setting the parameters to specific values.
```
So, the caveat with testing performance is that, part of the performance is dependent on Ignition's efficiency, and part of is dependent on hardware specifications. While Ignition's own efficiency will determine a max performance ceiling, high-performing hardware can have a higher ceiling than lower-performing hardware. So I would suggest specifying the hardware this is tested on. Specifying the CPU should be enough, e.g. laptop with Intel blah.

Author: 7b40828

Mainly, there are two parameters that can affect the computational cost of running
the plugin: the visualization and the contacts resolutions. The following parameters 
have been tested for a sensor with a size of 20x20x5 mm:

> - `<visualization_resolution>`: A value of 20 allows to see an enough

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `<visualization_resolution>`: A value of 20 allows us to see a sufficient
```

Author: 7b40828

number of forces and check what the sensor is looking at. However, if we
set the value to less than 15, lags can be expected when moving around the

> simulation due to the cost of requesting the `/marker` service too many times.

Reviewer: I forget if we have discussed this. Is there a similar thing to MarkerArray like in RViz, where you can give the service an array of markers at once, instead of repeatedly requesting? If so, that should help performance a great deal.

Author: Hmm no we haven't. I have to look that up, but it should definitely make a difference.

Reviewer: I think this is what we want https://github.com/ignitionrobotics/ign-gazebo/blob/master/src/rendering/MarkerManager.cc#L162
There appears to be a `/list` service, and its callback `OnList()` in the `MarkerManager` will publish a list of markers.

Author: I've tried it, but `/marker/list` gives you a [list of the markers](https://github.com/ignitionrobotics/ign-gazebo/blob/master/src/rendering/MarkerManager.cc#L67-L70) currently in the scene, so unfortunately it's not what we're looking for.

Reviewer: I replied in the code PR https://github.com/ignitionrobotics/ign-gazebo/pull/229#discussion_r468278088
Let's keep the conversation there and update the tutorial as necessary.

> The simulation itself may will even have problems when loading.

Reviewer: Redundant. Also a bit shooting ourselves in the foot.
```suggestion
```

Author: 7b40828

- `<contacts_resolution>`: Like the previous parameter, a value too low can

> cause the simulation to slow down or even not load at all. The following table

Reviewer: In general, I would refrain from making statements that discourage people from trying out this plugin at all.
```suggestion
cause the simulation to slow down. The following table
```

Author: 7b40828

> aims to provide and idea of how this parameter parameter affects the simulation:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
aims to provide and idea of how this parameter affects the simulation, with a single instance of the plugin loaded in the world:
```

Author: 7b40828

>     ______________________________________________________________________

Author: 7b40828

   | <contacts_resolution> | no. of contacts computed  |  Average RTF (%)  |
    ⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻
   |            1          |            441            |          95       |
    ⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻
   |          0.5          |            1681           |          90       |
    ⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻
   |          0.3          |            4489           |          70       |
    ⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻
   |          0.1          |            40200          |          20       |
    ⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻
    

> While the previous experiments had in mind a unique plugin in the simulation,

Reviewer: Instead of saying "by the way" after the fact, it is more clear to explicitly say the table is made with a single plugin, so I made a suggestion accordingly above.
```suggestion
```

Author: 7b40828

it's important to know how many of them could be loaded before the RTF becomes

> unacceptable. Of course, this depends on the parameters of each individual plugin,
> so all of them have been set as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
unacceptable. Of course, this depends on the parameters of each individual plugin.
In the following evaluation, they have been set as follows:
```

Author: 7b40828

```
  <visualization_resolution>15</visualization_resolution>
  <contacts_resolution>1</contacts_resolution>
  <visualize_forces>false</visualize_forces>
  <visualize_sensor>true</visualize_sensor>
  <contact_radius>0.001</contact_radius>
  <force_radius>0.0002</force_radius>
  <force_length>0.01</force_length>
  <extended_sensing>0.001</extended_sensing>
```

We found the following RTFs:
    _____________________________________________
   |    no. of sensors     |    Worst RTF (%)   |
    ⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻
   |            1          |         80         |
    ⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻
   |            3          |         54         |
    ⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻
   |            5          |         40         |
    ⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻
   |            7          |         35         |
    ⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻
   |           10          |          5         |
    ⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻⎻

> Clearly, the most computational expensive feature is the visualization of the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Clearly, the most computationally expensive feature is the visualization of the
```

Author: 7b40828

normal forces. If `<visualize_forces>` is turned on, problems are found when

> running the simulation with 3 or more sensors, and even 2 sensors is a demanding task.

Reviewer: "problems" is vague and makes the reader question, "what kind of problems? Should I care about those problems, or maybe it doesn't matter to me?" Either state explicitly what those problems are, or simply say a lag is observed.

Re the service, same question as above about MarkerArray type of request.

Author: 7b40828

  are computed.

## Performance
In order to give an idea about the resources consumed by the plugin, we carried 
out some simple experiments by setting the parameters to specific values.
To run the experiments, we've used a Xiaomi Mi Air 13.3 with an Intel Core
i5-8250U quad-core 1.6GHz.

Mainly, there are two parameters that can affect the computational cost of running
the plugin: the visualization and the contacts resolutions. The following parameters 
have been tested for a sensor with a size of 20x20x5 mm:

- `<visualization_resolution>`: A value of 20 allows us to see a sufficient
number of forces and check what the sensor is looking at. However, if we
set the value to less than 15, lags can be expected when moving around the
simulation due to the cost of requesting the `/marker` service too many times.

- `<contacts_resolution>`: Like the previous parameter, a value too low can
cause the simulation to slow down. The following table aims to provide an idea 
of how this parameter affects the simulation, with a single instance of the
plugin loaded in the world:

> | <contacts_resolution>  | no. of contacts computed | Average RTF (%) |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `<contacts_resolution>`  | No. of contacts computed | Average RTF (%) |
```

Author: ca675a8

## Future work

In order to improve the plugin, contributions are welcome in the following areas:
- Merging data coming from contact sensor and depth camera. As an initial step,

> the coherence of the information coming from both sensors could be checked. This would
> be a helpful heuristic used as a sanity check.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the coherence of the information coming from both sensors could be checked using a heuristic.
```

```

We found the following RTFs:

> | no. of sensors  | Worst RTF (%) |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| No. of sensors  | Worst RTF (%) |
```

Author: ca675a8
